Clean-up `MERGE` page (#1580)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/merge.adoc

:description: Information about Cypher's `MERGE` clause.
:table-caption!:
= MERGE

The `MERGE` clause combines the behavior of xref:clauses/match.adoc[`MATCH`] and xref:clauses/create.adoc[`CREATE`].
When merging a pattern:

* If the exact pattern is found, nothing is created; `MERGE` acts like `MATCH` and binds the found pattern.
* If the exact pattern is not found, `MERGE` acts like `CREATE` and creates the pattern.

`MERGE` also allows for specific actions depending on whether the specified pattern was matched (`ON MATCH`) or created (`ON CREATE`).

> It is recommended to create constraints prior to merging data: they provide index-backed performance improvements (in the case of property uniqueness and key constraints) while also preventing the creation of data that differ in unintended ways from pre-existing data.

Reviewer: this could link to the relevant section in this page

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| name
| newRel
| title

| "Charlie Sheen"
| "ACTED_IN"
| "Wall Street"

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[null-properties]]
== `null` properties

`MERGE` cannot be used on property values that are `null`.

For example, the following query will throw an error:

.`MERGE` on `null` property
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MERGE (martin:Person {name: 'Martin Sheen'})-[r:FATHER_OF {since: null}]->(charlie:Person {name: 'Charlie Sheen'})
RETURN type(r)
----

.GQLSTATUS error chain
[role="queryresult",stripes="all", cols="1", ]
|===
| link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/22N31/[22N31]: error: data exception - invalid properties in merge pattern. The relationship property `since` in '(martin)-[:FATHER_OF {since: null}]->(charlie)' is invalid. 'MERGE' cannot be used with a graph element property value that is null.

link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/22G03/[22G03]: error: data exception - invalid value type
|===

[[merge-new-patterns]]
== `MERGE` new patterns

If `MERGE` cannot match the exact pattern given in the query, it will create the pattern instead.

> To prevent the unintended creation of nodes or relationships that differ in unintended ways from existing ones, it is therefore recommended to use constraints when merging data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent the creation of nodes or relationships that differ in unintended ways from existing ones, it is therefore recommended to use constraints when merging data.
```
double "unintended"

[role="queryresult",options="header",cols="3*<m"]
|===

| name
| newRel
| location

| "Charlie Sheen" 
| "BORN_IN" 
| "New York" 

| "Charlie Sheen"
| "BORN_IN" 
| "New York" 

| "Martin Sheen"
| "BORN_IN"
| "Ohio"

| "Michael Douglas"
| "BORN_IN"
| "New Jersey"

| "Oliver Stone"
| "BORN_IN"
| "New York"

| "Rob Reiner" 
| "BORN_IN"
| "New York"

3+d|Rows: 6
|===

`MERGE` can also create both a new node and a relationship in a single clause:

.`MERGE` a relationship between an existing node and a merged node derived from a node property
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (person:Person)
MERGE (person)-[r:HAS_CHAUFFEUR]->(chauffeur:Chauffeur {name: person.chauffeurName})
REMOVE person.chauffeurName
RETURN startNode(r) AS startNode,
       type(r) AS newRel,
       endNode(r).name AS newChauffeurNode
ORDER BY newChauffeurNode
----

As the graph contains no `Chauffeur` nodes and no `HAS_CHAUFFEUR` relationships, `MERGE` creates six `Chauffeur` nodes, each with a `name` corresponding to the matched `Person` node's `chauffeurName` property, and a `HAS_CHAUFFEUR` relationship between each pair.
Also note that the query removes the existing `chauffeurName` properties on any `Person` nodes.

> Because `Charlie Sheen` and `Michael Douglas` share a chauffeur name (`John Brown`), two separate `Chauffeur` nodes are created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though `Charlie Sheen` and `Michael Douglas` share a chauffeur name (`John Brown`), two separate `Chauffeur` nodes are created.
```

the name being the same is not the reason, is it?
what is the reason then? is there a way to achieve the same with a single clause?

ORDER BY newChauffeurNode
----

As the graph contains no `Chauffeur` nodes and no `HAS_CHAUFFEUR` relationships, `MERGE` creates six `Chauffeur` nodes, each with a `name` corresponding to the matched `Person` node's `chauffeurName` property, and a `HAS_CHAUFFEUR` relationship between each pair. 

This differs from the `Location` example above, where a preceding `MERGE` bound the `Location` nodes before the relationship was created.

> Here, `MERGE` matches on the full pattern including the relationship, so for each `Person` node it finds no existing match and creates a new `Chauffeur` node, even if one with the same name already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, `MERGE` matches the full pattern including the relationship, which doesn't match the existing `Person` nodes and instead creates new `Chauffeur` nodes, even if `Person` nodes with the same names already exist.
```

* The index order cannot be leveraged, so the planner must insert separate ordering if required later on in the query.
* Parallel runtime seeks and scans are single-threaded.

|===

[[merge-with-constraints]]
== Using `MERGE` with constraints

Constraints on identifying properties (such as `id`) when using `MERGE` prevents duplicating data that differ in unintended ways.
They also protect against duplicate creation under concurrent loads, where `MERGE` alone only guarantees the existence of the pattern, not its uniqueness.

[role=label--enterprise-edition]
=== Enforce property existence and uniqueness with key constraints

There are two ways to ensure the uniqueness of a property value in a database: xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-uniqueness-constraints[property uniqueness constraints] and xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-key-constraints[key constraints].

> Both are backed by indexes, which mean they provide significant performance improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both are backed by indexes, which provide significant performance improvements.
```

Key constraints are the preferred option, however, since they both guarantee the existence and uniqueness of a property.

.Create key constraint
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT FOR (n:Product) REQUIRE n.id IS NODE KEY
----

> .`MERGE` a node that abides to key constraint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.`MERGE` a node that abides by a key constraint
```

initial reflex, but found this to back it up:
https://jeremybutterfield.com/2020/08/27/abide-by-or-abide-to/

not 100% sure though

alternatives: adheres to, follows, complies with

|===

Similarly, an attempt to `MERGE` a node with a missing `id` property would fail due to the key constraint:

.`MERGE` a node that violates key constraint
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MERGE (n:Product {category: 'Computing', type: 'Laptop'})
----

.GQLSTATUS error chain
[role="queryresult",stripes="all",cols="1"]
|===
| link:https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/22N77/[22N77]: error: data exception - property presence verification failed. NODE (24) with label 'Product' must have the following properties: `id`.
|===

[role=label--enterprise-edition]
=== Enforce property value types with property type constraints

xref:schema/constraints/create-constraints.adoc#create-property-type-constraints[Property type constraints] are useful to enforce type correctness when merging data.

.Create property type constraint
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT FOR (n:Product) REQUIRE n.id IS :: INTEGER
----

> .`MERGE` a node that abides to property type constraint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.`MERGE` a node that abides by a property type constraint
```

(see above)
